
=========
Gephi Lab
=========

Gephi is a program for visualizing graphs.  It also includes 
implementations of some of the graph algorithms we've discussed
in class, like PageRank and the HITS (hub/authority) algorithm
for discovering the most "important" nodes in a directed graph.

In this lab we'll use it to create some visualizations of
social networks. It used to be relatively easy to download
a graph of your Facebook friends and all friendships between
them, but this is now much trickier.  So instead, I've
produced a few social graphs from Twitter that you'll
find in this directory.

br.gdf: Vertices are Twitter users with > 15 tweets in Breton
gd.gdf: Vertices are Twitter users with > 50 tweets in Scottish Gaelic
gv.gdf: Vertices are Twitter users with > 5 tweets in Manx Gaelic
ha.gdf: Vertices are Twitter users with > 100 tweets in Hausa
ht.gdf: Vertices are Twitter users with > 2000 tweets in Haitian Creole

In each case, there is a directed edge from one user to another when
the first mentions the second in a tweet.

These are simple text files.  Open one of them in your favorite text
editor and have a look around.  The beginning of the file contains
one row per vertex (userID, username, number of followers/followings).
Further down in the file there is one row per edge, containing
just the userIDs of the two endpoints.

After starting Gephi, you can open one of these graph
files via the menu item File > Open...

In some of these graphs, there are vertices that aren't connected
to the others by an edge.  To start, it's a good idea to filter
these out; in the right-hand pane, there's a tab that says "Filters" -
click that.  Then open the "Topology" folder, and double-click
"Giant Component". Then click the Filter button at the bottom 
of the pane.  You'll see the statistics at the top change, showing
the number of vertices that were removed.

Next, we can compute some of the useful graph statistics that we
learned about in lecture.  Click the "Statistics" tab to the
right of "Filters".  You'll see "PageRank" as one of the
available algorithms; click the "Run" button next to that.
This will pop up a window with a report on the distribution
of PageRank values, which you can glance at and then dismiss.
Later on, we'll use the PageRank values to display "important"
nodes more prominently.

Next, find the "Modularity" algorithm, just above PageRank, and
click the "Run" button next to it.  This groups the vertices
into some number of "subcommunities" - roughly speaking, there are
more edges between vertices in the same subcommunity than there
are between vertices in different subcommunities.  If you did
this with the graph of your Facebook friends, you'd probably 
get subcommunities corresponding to high school friends,
college friends, maybe friends related to different hobbies
or interests you have, and so on.  Again, you'll get a popup
window with some statistics about the number of subcommunities
and the number of vertices in each; give it a glance and then dismiss it.

Now let's make the picture look nicer.  We'll use the options
in the "Appearance" pane on the left-hand side of the Gephi 
window.  You'll see a tab for "Nodes", click that, and then
click the "palette" icon next to it.  Then click "Attribute"
under that, and select "Modularity Class" from the drop-down
menu.  This automatically chooses colors for each of the
subcommunities; you're welcome to change the default colors by
clicking on the color and choosing a nicer one from the palette.
When you're happy with the colors, click "Apply".

By default the vertices are laid out randomly in the Gephi 
window.  Fortunately, Gephi has a number of algorithms that
can lay out the vertices in more sensible ways.  These are 
available in the "Layout" pane, beneath the Appearance
pane on the left-hand side of the Gephi window.
Start by choosing "Force Atlas" from the drop-down menu.
Then click "Run" and watch the vertices move to more "natural"
positions!  Subcommunities should end up near each other
for the most part.  You'll need to click "Stop" when the 
image stabilizes.  Force Atlas 2 and Fruchterman-Reingold
are interesting as well.

Now let's add the Twitter usernames to the image. For this,
you need to click the "T" icon at the very bottom of the screen.
The font is likely much too big by default; you can shrink the
text a bit by choosing a smaller font (by clicking the name of
the font at the bottom of the window). You can also fine-tune
the font size with the slider to the right.

Before tweaking this too much, we'd like to give extra
prominence to the nodes that have high page rank.
To do this, click the "tT" icon in the Appearance pane,
then click "Attribute". Select "PageRank" from the dropdown
menu, with Min size = 1, and Max size = 5.  Then click "Apply".

There are a couple more things you can do to make the image
as nice as possible.  First, you can increase the size 
of the whole graph by choosing "Expansion" from the drop-down
menu under "Layout" and clicking "Run".  It's sometimes
helpful to do this after doing Force Atlas.

Next, if the usernames overlap one another, you can choose
"Label Adjust" from the same drop-down, and then click "Run".
This algorithm will move the vertices around to try and 
ensure that the labels overlap as little as possible.

When you're happy with how the graph looks, you can export a
high-quality image by clicking "Preview" at the very top of the
Gephi window.  You'll see a number of Settings that you can
choose from in the left-hand pane (including some nice "presets"
from the drop-down menu).
