
In this lab we will use (a souped-up version of) the code
from Chapter 13 of the book to create our first Bayesian
classifier.

The problem we'll be looking at is one I've mentioned in class
a few times, namely, "sentiment analysis". For the purposes of
this lab, we'll formulate the problem as a binary classifier in 
which we try to label texts as being either "positive sentiment"
or "negative sentiment".  (Some formulations allow gradations, or
just a third class for "neutral sentiment", etc., but I prefer having
only two classes for this first example.)

The training data we'll use consists of tweets written in the
Irish language, gathered as part of another research project.
I very intentionally chose a language that (I suspect)
no one in the course actually speaks! This will prevent you from
introducing any bias in your experiments, or injecting any 
intuition into how you model the problem.

There are 10000 "positive sentiment" tweets in the file
irish-happy.txt, and 10000 "negative sentiment" tweets in
the file irish-sad.txt. I've stripped personally
identifying information (usernames, etc.) Normally,
assembling big sets of training data in machine learning is
a huge challenge; very often the best way to achieve good
results when building a classifier is to pay humans to label
examples by hand to create a training set. In this
case, I took a big shortcut, and just gathered tweets
containing either a happy or sad emoticon or emoji
character!  So, strictly speaking, we're not really doing
sentiment analysis, we're building a classifier that
predicts whether a given tweet will contain a happy or 
frownie face, as a kind of "proxy" for sentiment analysis.
As you'll see below, the results show this isn't completely
unreasonable.

(1) The code for the training and running the classifier
is in the file naive_bayes.py.  Open that file and
browse around, and see if you can make sense of the code.
The code in the textbook is written as a spam vs. not-spam
classifier, but I've changed that to "true" vs. "false" for 
this lab.  For us, "true" means "happy", and "false" means "sad".
  
  (a) Find the place where I open the two files containing
      the training data and read them in.
  (b) Recall that in our Naive Bayes model, we treat "words"
      as a features.  Find the place in the code where we
      break the texts into words; this relies on knowing
      any characters special to the language in question.
  (c) I discussed the importance of smoothing when computing
      word probabilities; can you find the place in the code
      where word probabilities are computed and "smoothed"?
      Hint: instead of "adding 1" to all word counts, the code 
      adds a parameter "k"...
  (d) Note that the code doesn't multiply probabilities for
      the reasons discussed in class; find where it takes
      log of the probabilities and adds those together.
  (e) The code automatically splits the two files into 
      subsets for training/testing.  Can you figure out 
      the percentage it assigns to each?

(2) Now, having studied the code, you're ready run the script
from the command line:

$ python naive_bayes.py

This will output the results of training a classifier on
the training subset, and applying it to the test subset. 
The first line of output will look something like this:

Counter({(True, True): 1992, (False, False): 1389, (False, True): 579, (True, False): 471})

This is saying that 1992 happy tweets we labeled as happy by
the classifier, 1389 sad tweets were labeled as sad, 579 sad 
were labeled as happy, and 471 happy were labeled as sad.

Use this to compute the percentage labeled correctly, as a
simple measure of the accuracy of the classifier.

Since the training set is chosen randomly, you'll get a different
answer each time you run; you should run a few times and average
these percentages.

(3) Error analysis.  The next thing you'll see in the output is
the five "truest false" tweets, and the five "falsest true" tweets. 
The "truest false" tweets are the ones that are actually sad,
but which look the happiest, and vice versa for "falsest true".
Google Translate supports Irish to English translation; copy
and paste these tweets into Google Translate and see if you can 
figure out why the classifier is particularly confused in these cases.

(4) The next part of the output shows the ten words most
characteristic of happy tweets and sad tweets, respectively.
Again, copy and paste these into Google Translate and 
see if they appear reasonable. Can you "explain away" any
that don't appear reasonable?  Should we change the model
in some way?

(5) The pattern [a-záéíóú'-]+ defines a word to be
    "a string of one or more letters, apostrophes, or hyphens".

    (a) With this definition, the hashtag "#kevin" gets truncated
        to just "kevin". Change the code to use the pattern
        #[a-záéíóú'-]+ which will select *only* hashtags
        as features. Rerun the classifier and compare the 
        percentage accuracy and the list of "best" features
        with the results from earlier.
  
    (b) Now change the pattern to #?[a-záéíóú'-]+.  The question mark
        means that the # is optional; in other words, this will 
        allow both regular words *and* hashtags as features.
        Rerun and compare results.

(6) Irish (like the other Celtic languages) has an interesting feature
called "initial mutation" not found in English. In certain grammatical
contexts, the pronunciation of the start of a word changes. For example,
the word for "woman" is "bean" (pronounced sort of like English "ban"),
but if you say "the woman", it's "an bhean" (pronounced "un van").

What's important for us is that "bean" and "bhean" are really
the "same word" in some sense, so we *might* do better by counting 
them together when training the classifier.

To do this, you'll need to modify the "tokenize" function slightly.
Just replace the current final line of the function:

    return set(all_words)

with:

    answer = set()
    for w in all_words:
      if len(w)>1 and w[1]=='h':
        answer.add(w.replace("h","",1))
      else:
        answer.add(w)
    return answer

(Extra Credit: automatically 100% on next quiz!) 
There's another kind of mutation in Irish called "eclipsis", 
described here: http://nualeargais.ie/gnag/eklipse.htm
Modify the code to take this mutation into account also,
and report results of the classifier.  

The upshot of all of these exercises is that there are
*many* choices you make when training a classifier, and
often the best way to know the right choice to make is
by trying it out and running the classifier on the test set.
This philosophy will come in handy when we run our 
"bakeoff" competition later in the semester.  Since we'll
be doing a classifier of some kind, you have the option of
using this code, and making similar tweaks:

* change the definition of a "word" (include hashtags, numbers, etc.?)
* lump together upper/lowercase (or not)
* lump together words in others ways (e.g. Irish initial mutation, or
  "stemming" words like "jumped", "jumps", "jumping" -> "jump")
* change the "smoothing constant" k
* ignore words that appear just once in training ("thresholding")
* use pairs or triples of words as features in place of single words

It would be a REALLY good idea to try some of these ideas and see how 
high you can push the accuracy of this classifier as a warmup
for the bakeoff.

(7) If you have time, try changing the percentage of examples used
for training vs. testing (the default is 75% training).  Try a few
different values, and see if you can graph the accuracy of the
classifier as a function of the amount of training data. A graph
like this is called the "learning curve"; generally speaking we
expect accuracy to increase the more training data we have.
Does it appear to plateau?  What might you predict if we trained
in the same way using 1 million happy/sad tweets?
